post: Uploading first draft (#118)
cloudx-labs/posts: posts/frangeris/06.stale-cache.md

---
title: "Stale cache, the holy grail of performance"
published: false
description: The perfect cache system for an API service
tags: "cache, cdn, api, performance"
cover_image: ./assets/06.cover.png
---

Cache on APIs is a must-have feature for any service that wants to scale. It's a way to reduce the load on your servers and improve the response time for your users by serving the same content multiple times, getting the same result without having to process the request again.

> The issue is that..... implementing cache systems is hard, tricky and can cause a lot of headaches when it comes to invalidating the cache, purging and keeping the cache fresh with the latest data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The issue is that... implementing cache systems is hard, tricky and can cause a lot of headaches when it comes to invalidating the cache, purging and keeping the cache fresh with the latest data.
```

Author: It was on purpose, but ok 😂

- **Cache-Control**: Dictates the mechanism to control for _whom_, _how_ and _until when_ the response can be cached.
- **ETag**: Is a unique identifier for the response state.

Currently, the [HTTP/2 RFC Specification](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7540) defines how the `Cache-Control` header should works telling the client or intermediary caches (like CDNs) how to behave, it inherits the same directives from the HTTP/1.1 specification, but with some improvements.

In the other hand, the `ETag` is used like an index key, if the value hasn't change, the cache can be used, if not, a new fresh response is needed. It solve the problem to see if the data has changed or not, but it doesn't solve the problem of keeping the cache fresh with the latest data, this is where the concept of _stale cache_ comes in.

## Stale cache

This is a concept where the cache is served by an intermediary to the client even if it's expired, but the server is still processing the request in the background to get the latest data, when the server gets the latest data, it updates the cache with the new data and serves the fresh data to clients on the next request.

> [image: stale-cache.png]

Reviewer: where is the file?

Author: Still draft...

With an account already created, we can create a new "pull zone", this is the layer that sits in front of the API and act as intermediary caching everything being requested. Given the name `xxxxxxx.b-cdn.net`, a domain will be created, we need to also add the "Origin URL" that is the api endpoint we want to cache.

While creating the pull zone, they provide the options to check "in what zones" we want to store the cached data, so the content is served from the closest region instead of traveling all the way to the origin, we will select all the zones available so the cache is everywhere 🤯.

![Pull zone for edge locations](./assets/06.image.4.png)

With the pull zone created, is ready to be used as proxy for the API, now lets move back the the endpoint code to make the header customization so bunny know what to do with our origin responses.

We can start making request to the new domain pull zone domain, so any requests made to CDN will be forwarded behind scenes to API but caching the response.

```plaintext
// instead of
GET https://api.example.com/random

// use the pull zone domain
GET https://mynewpullzone.b-cdn.net/random
```

> By default our cache control header is se to `no-cache`, so every time we hit the pull zone url provided it will make a request to the origin, so lets change that behavior by just adding `max-age` directive to the header.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default our cache control header is set to `no-cache`, so every time we hit the pull zone URL provided it will make a request to the origin, so lets change that behavior by just adding `max-age` directive to the header.
```

```plaintext
"Cache-Control": `public, max-age=86400`,
```

This will tell the CDN to cache the response for 1 day, so the next requests will be served from the cache instead of making a request to the origin. And by enabling the previous regions zones, the request will be served from the closest edge location to the client getting a lightning fast response.

![Pull zone for edge locations](./assets/06.image.5.png)

🔥 `18ms` of response time, that's a huge improvement from the previous `200ms - 450ms`, and this is just the beginning.

The `CDN-Cache` header returned in the request tell us if the request was served by the CDN cache or not, in case the value is `MISS`, the request was made to the origin, if the value is `HIT`, the request was served from the cache.

There are other features that can be implemented, bunny provide features like "Query String Sorting" that when enabled, the query parameters will be automatically sorted into a consistent order before checking the cache. For example, this will treat `/random?width=200&height=100` and `/random?height=100&width=200` as the same path.

> Implementing a cache system is crucial for improving the performance and scalability of your API services. By leveraging the concept of stale cache and using CDNs like Bunny.net, you can significantly reduce response times and server load. The `Cache-Control` header, with directives like `stale-while-revalidate`, allows you to serve stale content while fetching fresh data in the background, ensuring that your users always get the best possible experience. Remember, while Bunny.net is used in this example, these caching principles can be applied with any CDN provider that supports similar capabilities. Happy caching!

Reviewer: Is this the conclusion? I think you need an extra title.

Author: You mean `### Conclusion`?

Reviewer: or another title to mark the conclusion.

Author: Added

---
title: "Stale cache, the holy grail of performance"
published: true
description: The perfect cache system for an API service
tags: "cache, cdn, api, performance"
cover_image: ./assets/06.cover.png
---

> Cache on APIs is a must-have feature for any service that wants to scale. It's a way to reduce the load on your servers and improve the response time for your users by serving the same content multiple times, getting the same result without having to process the request again.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Cache on APIs is a must-have feature for any service that aims to scale. It's a way to reduce the load on your servers and improve the response time for your users by serving the same content multiple times, getting the same result without having to process the request again.
```

> The issue is that... implementing cache systems is hard, tricky and can cause a lot of headaches when it comes to invalidating the cache, purging and keeping the cache fresh with the latest data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But that is the issue: implementing cache systems is hard, tricky and can cause a lot of headaches when it comes to invalidating the cache, purging and keeping it fresh with the latest data.
```

Author: This is intended :)

> In this article, we will explore the concept of stale cache, test by examples and see how CDNs providers like Bunny CDN can help us to keep the cache fresh without having to purge it every time a new request is made.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this article we will explore the concept of stale cache, test different scenarios with examples and see how CDN providers like _Bunny CDN_ can help us to keep the cache fresh without having to purge it with every new request.
```

Do we have a ref to Bunny CDN?

---

Let's start by breaking down the pieces.

## ⌛️ Response time

> When you make a request to an API, the response time is the time it takes for the server to process the request and send back the response. This time can vary depending on the server's load, the network latency, and the complexity of the request.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you make a request to an API, the response time is what it takes for the server to process the request and send a response back.
```

> Typically the composition of this time is affected multiple factors like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This time period can typically vary depending on multiple factors from its composition like the server's load, the network latency and the complexity of the request:
```

- **Network latency**: The time it takes for the request to travel from the client to the server.
- **DNS lookup time**: The time it takes for the client to resolve the server's domain name to an IP address.
- **Connections and SSL Handshakes**: Set of ticks and checks that the server needs to do before sending the response.

And when the requests finally arrive, then in the server side we have:

> - **Processing time**: Time it takes for the server to process the request and send back the response.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Processing time**: what it takes for the server to process the request and send back the response.
```

> - **Response size**: The size of the response data, which affects the time it takes to transfer the data over the network.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Response size**: this affects the time it takes to transfer the data over the network.
```

It seems unnecessary to repeat what is obvious from the title. Maybe some other definition before talking about what it does, but not the same words the other way around.

> As the processing time in the server is something we can control by optimizing the code, the other factors are out of our control, but we can reduce the time it takes to process the request by using a cache system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As the processing time in the server is something we can control by optimizing the code, the other factors are out of our control. Despite that we can reduce the time it takes to process the request by using a cache system.
```

> There are others factors like "cold-start" time on serverless implementations that also increase the time it takes to process the request, but this is out of the scope of this article.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> There are others factors like "cold-start" time on serverless implementations that also increase the time it takes to process the request, but this is out of the scope of this article.
```
